knative adoption for Kyma eventing (#182)
kyma-project/community: sig-and-wg/wg-knative/knative-eventing-adoption.md

  * Kyma does not want to run heavy workloads on the cluster when the customer is using a `Cloud PubSub`.
* The Knative subscription object is mapped to channel where a single channel can have many subscriptions.
  * Following this approach we can keep the subscription model simple.

**Cons**

* A Knative channel is a heavy object with many cascading resources. Having many channels can increase load on istio service mesh. 

## Option 2

* Map multiple `Kyma event-types` to a `single channel` or do some kind of grouping.

**Pros**

* Create minimal knative channels thus creating less cascading resources.

**Cons**

* The extra complexity of maintaining the mapping.
* **The Kyma eventing will be a thick layer with potential heavy workloads** running on cluster despite customer using a `Cloud PubSub`.
* The subscription management will become complex.
  * A single knative channel will have subscriptions for multiple event-types.
  * This will generate unnecessary network traffic and workload.
  * The `dispatcher` will receive events for all event-types belonging to a channel. Then it has to discard and only deliver those for which the Kyma Subscription has been created.

>   * This will lead to fat topics in the underlying PubSub.

Reviewer: **Comment**: what are `fat topics`? Also I would combine this sentence with the previous one.

## Option 3 (Future alternative)

There have been some discussions in the Knative community about the challenges and how to map business event types to a channel.
One idea is to create **one channel per PubSub**. This will create one `K8S Service` and `Istio Virtual Service`. 
To make the dispatcher aware of the multiple diverse event types, use the **URI** part of the K8S service mapped to a channel.

![](assets/event-types-future-option3.svg)

* Knative eventing should ensure that a unified approach is used across dispatchers.
* The `Knative subscription <--> Knative Channel` model needs to evolve to support such semantics. Currently all subscriptions belong to a channel.
* There might be impact on the `Knative source` model.

## Decision

The event types in Kyma will map to Channels in Knative eventing. (Option 1).

> A detailed mapping would look like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A detailed mapping would be as follows:
```

![](assets/event-types.svg)

## Choosing an implementation for event type

For each event type, there needs to be a pre-configuration to decide which implementation should be used. 
For events which are not critical, one can decide `local PubSub` based on NATS Streaming, while for critical events, one can decide to use battle-tested services such as `Google PubSub`.

This can be achieved either:

* during event registration,
* as separate action from the user in the Event catalog.

## When to create a channel

* Create or get a channel when a subscription is created
  * Only create the channel when someone actually wants to consume events.
  * This can be extended in a way that we discard the events at an early stage when there is no consumer configured.
  * The **missing piece of puzzle** is:
	* how/when to enable the user to specify which PubSub to use?
	* How to handle the use case when the event needs to trigger a compute in the cloud such as GCP via publishing events. In this case, there will not be any Kyma subscription. *Perhaps a operator action to manually create a channel could be applied*

**Known Challenges**

> * K8S and Istio service explosion. Imagine having 1000 event types thus creating 1000 services. This will put the load on the service discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* K8S and Istio Service overload. For example, having 1000 event types creating 1000 services. This will put the load on the service discovery.
```
**Comment** Let's maybe tone the `explosion` part a bit :D Although it's fine for the proposal purposes, we should avoid it in the future - so that it does not land in the official doc :)

  >**Note**: This has been discussed with Knative community and they are aware of this issue.

> # Publish & Consumption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Publishing and consumption
```

**Comment**: or it can be `Publish and consume`.

Knative eventing interfaces need to be abstracted to:

* Accommodate the flux in the Knative eventing APIs.

> * Provide an event publish and subscribe model that is consistent with Kyma concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Provide an event publishing and subscribe model that is consistent with Kyma concepts.
```

>   * Publish

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Publishing
```

   | `http://core-publish.kyma-system:8080/v1/events`                 | `http://order.created.ec-prod-channel.kyma-system`. This is an evolving concept and might change in the future.                      |
   | Errors are handled and translated to simplified user infomation. | Errors such as `No channel` will need to be inferred.                                                                                |
   | User always deals with the `event types` in Kyma.                | This puts the burden on the user to understand the channel aspect and translate from the event type.                                 |
   | A consistent experience for external and internal events.        | Even if we do the tranlation at the gateway for events from external, the internal events would still need to deal with Knative APIs |
   | API ensures that the event paylaod is a valid json               | No validation of event payload being a json. This can lead to difficult to troubleshoot errors especially during consumption.        |

>    - Eventually Publish should evolve into a meagre proxy that is only mapping some headers or performing an http rewrite. The first step in this direction is to evolve the API to align with CE specification. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Eventually, publishing should evolve into a merge proxy that is only mapping some headers or performing an `http` rewrite. The first step in this direction is to evolve the API to align with CE specification. 
```

**Comment**: did you mean `merge proxy` in this sentence?

>   * Consume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Consumption
```

> 	- There is not much difference for consume apart from the extra knowledge of channels and translating them to Kyma concpets of `event types` and `application identifier`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- There is not much difference for consumption apart from the extra knowledge of channels and translating them to Kyma concepts of `event types` and `application identifier`.
```

> 	- Consume needs to implement `Event Activation` as Knative eventing has no such or similiar concept. Post discussion with Knative community, they do not want to introduce such constraints and expect applications to build them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Consumption needs to implement `Event Activation` as Knative eventing has no such or a similar concept. After the discussion with Knative community, they do not want to introduce such constraints and expect applications to build them.
```

> Refer [examples](./kyma-knative-eventing-examples.md)

Reviewer: For details, see

> ## Publish

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Publishing
```

> ### Evolving the API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Expanding the API
```
Maybe `expanding` would be a better word choice here.

As per the current API, the event metadata and payload are part of the HTTP body. This was in sync with the initial cloud event specification.

> The CE specification has evolved and now supports HTTP transport binding with event metadata being passed in headers. See [example](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/v0.2/http-transport-binding.md#314-examples).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CE specification has expanded and now supports HTTP transport binding with event metadata being passed in headers. See [example](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/v0.2/http-transport-binding.md#314-examples).
```

> The publish API will be evolved to support cloud events specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The publishing API will be expanded to support cloud events specification.
```

This could enable us in future to remove the translation being done and directly call the Knative API to publish an event.

![](assets/publish-api.svg)

### Consumption

A serverless deployed and running in Kyma should be configure events as triggers. 

> e.g. A Lambda configured with trigger for `order.created` event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a Lambda configured with the trigger for the `order.created` event.
```

![](assets/consume.svg)

> > **TBD** How Knative sources can be applied to Kyma eventing model?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **TBD** How can Knative sources be applied to Kyma eventing model?
```
